newsletter number one
manners and marketing
i'm presently part way through the
editing phase of the next episode of
topcast devoted to stephen pinker's book
rationality
the next chapter i'm dealing with is
probability and his book as i keep
saying is an excellent overview of
rationality as understood by mainstream
academia
the last episode of topcast my proper
podcast episode 111 was my discussion of
david deutch's talk on probability
titled physics without probability and i
think that talk by david serves as what
might be called the most up-to-date gold
standard understanding of what
probability is given our best
understanding of reason and reality
especially quantum theory and the rest
of physics so having completed that
episode it made it difficult not to be
hugely nitpicky when it came to going to
pinker's book rationality when he
started to talk about probability now i
am a bit of a nitpicker but that can be
important for rationality if we focus on
the small errors maybe the big errors
might take care of themselves well not
literally
but sometimes one can find patterns in
the noise of error and then it can make
the analysis somewhat more swift so in
this case looking closely at pinker's
book rationality when it comes to the
probability chapter it became apparent
there was a particular pattern of errors
or misconceptions and once i thought i'd
identified those then it made
appreciating the rest of the chapter for
what it was
somewhat more simple so that should be
coming out soon i should say at this
point that this is rather like a mini
podcast and for this episode just this
first episode it's going to be a lot
longer than i plan on any future
newsletter being the second episode
might be an exception as well i'm
getting used to this format i may or may
not continue to publish this particular
content on my usual channels maybe this
first one can serve as the advertisement
for listeners to sign up to the
newsletter
links in the description for that but i
don't plan on polishing this quite as
much as i would do with actual normal
top cast episodes
without further ado let me get to the
meat of the matter in this particular
newsletter my meanderings and ramblings
for this particular first episode so
what's been cropping up for me recently
across both media and social media is
the matter of manners especially in
public discourse
for a while i bought into the idea that
manners were just time wasting a bit of
an obstacle to saying clearly and
directly what you needed to get across
get to the point and so on
in many cases this is true legal or
business situations let's say but we
also exist in a culture and the culture
has traditions and they exist for a
reason
and what is interesting to me is
academic and intellectual culture where
manners seem to have swiftly in some
places at least gone on the decline and
it only appears to have from what i can
see negative consequences
it's astonishing to me that many of
those i looked up to when i was a
teenager or a student just entering
university or still in at school myself
perhaps these people might not have been
my intellectual heroes as such but you
know the academics who both taught me
personally and those who occupied these
stratospheric positions of expertise and
authority at our oldest public
institutions of learning
so often these days in terms of their
public personas it's a very impolite and
in politic
not least online it seems they don't
care how good a job they do of turning
off the young from their own areas of
expertise the areas of expertise that i
used to and continue to find so
interesting like i looked up to and i
continue to look up to professor paul
davies when i was younger i knew he was
a great physicist and science
communicator of course he would be above
crass and petty disagreement
he was every bit a polite gentleman he
remains that as far as i know
but then he's also not on social media
from what i can tell and there are other
important exceptions that are on social
media and who do manage to remain
perfectly courteous
one might think that's hard
but is it i see too many academics
rising to the bait although it's not
really rising it's descending into a
gutter of personal insults rather often
and so we have some of the brightest
young minds young men and women turning
less to science at times turning their
nose up at it and more readily turning
to well as a quick example crypto and
entrepreneurship now maybe that's all
for the good maybe that's all for a
better world why not
when the examples of clear minds and
engaging discussions are often seemingly
framed in more mature language and depth
than the
well i have to say rather more childish
partisan and sirlish content found in
the feeds of some scientists online
why wouldn't you turn to the
entrepreneurs for advice and for heroes
intellectual heroes even or insofar as
some business people are partisan and
might be discourteous and rude online
well at least they're rich and having
fun the scientists and intellectuals
aren't even doing that much so often
they seem to hate their work despise
those they work for and don't seem
particularly happy with their own life
choices at times so that's what i'm
reacting to today
is there one thing that has set me off
well there's not one thing there's just
a number of things that came one after
another but the straw that broke the
camel's back so to speak came from a
historian of science i won't mention who
he is but he was writing about neil
degrasse tyson i'll come back to that
soon but you know me myself when i'm not
producing yet more material about how i
agree with david deutsch and karl popper
i am producing material about how i
disagree with some other thinker like
steven pinker in places or neil degrasse
tyson himself or bostrom and so on but
what i would hope is that however
passionate i get on those points or
however much i chastise some of their
content
i hope i'm not being rude in doing so
i'm not trying too much to analyze the
psychology of those people i'm more
interested in their ideas and how those
ideas represent misconceptions about
reality and yet i read things like i'll
link to the article if you're listening
to this
where
i read it and i wonder why just why is
some of that language chosen like for
example even if it's a joke that tyson
quote knows nothing
why say he is quote
spouting total crap and so on
like i disagree with tyson a lot but
like i say and i'll come back to this
again
i think it actually hampers the
potential for error correction for
learning sometimes i think forget
compulsory military service or school
everyone should be forced into doing a
two-year front-facing tour of duty in
retail at times
there's just a lot of rudeness out there
in society as if
some people have never been on the
receiving end of it so they just give it
out a lot they don't know what it feels
like to experience rudeness from the
other side i do not mean only online i
mean you see it so often the so-called
covert karen who came out in force
especially in retail settings
yes yes sometimes the shopkeeper was the
person behaving absurdly but rather more
often it was the crazy customer who was
under the misapprehension they had a
right to service or some such that the
supermarket amounted to the public
square and any poor employee on their
11th hour of a 12th hour shift for the
sixth day straight that week really
needed to hear about how it was their
constitutional right both to be served
and to not wear a mask amidst a cloud of
expletives covert certainly exacerbated
all of that and highlighted to me the
importance of courtesy the efficiency of
manners
if you want the transaction to go as
fast smoothly and friendly as possible
in the grocery store or restaurant or
anywhere at all obey every single rule
of the establishment to the letter and
get through it nicely wear the mask keep
your distance smile and have a nice day
okay common sense i would have thought
but apparently not everyone has learned
this lesson and then we turn to the
academic world where one would think
there are a few rungs above this
perhaps sometimes some professors have
been told since the third grade that
they are the smartest person in the room
and everyone has hung on their every
word perhaps it takes some time before
someone finally disagrees with them
because that someone isn't reciting a
textbook that they are also aware of
because perhaps
they've moved beyond it or not
maybe they're a crank or maybe just
mistaken
but there is a method to avoid madness
here and its manners
again on academia how many have held
other jobs this is not to say such a
thing as necessary it's not necessary i
know academics who are perfectly and
consistently polite at every turn online
and offline and they've had the
scholarships all throughout their formal
learning got the grants and positions
immediately and really if the word
privilege is to apply anywhere it's to
them
and yet
they
are wonderfully nice people but there
are others there are others
i guess they're everywhere in the phd
credential or earning tenure or its near
equivalent doesn't require one to pass
over a hurdle
pleasant human being
okay
so we cannot always be consistently
pleasant but how about online
when you've got professor or doctor in
your bio alongside your pronouns and you
are engaged in a discussion about your
precise domain of expertise
you keep up a modicum of courtesy
so if i myself i've been lucky i've
rarely been on the receiving end happily
but i've seen others so chastised by the
highly qualified
it's not a great advertisement for the
institution all else left aside and now
i'm not going to be calling out
particular names on this issue
as someone who follows in the tradition
of papa i'm an admirer of so-called
critical rationalism now critical
rationalism is all about being critical
criticism finding flaws and errors in
claims and seeking to correct them
and criticism gets a bad rap because
people misdirect their criticism
away from ideas and onto people and
perhaps that's a beef i have it
perpetuates this notion of criticism as
being a bad thing or an undesirable
thing or an unpleasant thing and that
critics are people who are critical of
people
which they shouldn't be
i say it's a category error actually to
criticize a person because a person is
that entity that generates ideas and can
direct its attention here or there a
person can choose what to focus on a
person has that capacity to freely
choose and create
all of that together is the way ideas
knowledge is generated and then
criticized but to criticize the entity
that does the idea making is to confuse
the product the idea with the process
the person
the idea should be criticized and
corrected for the purposes of progress
in other words
for improving it but criticizing the
very means of creating the idea in the
first place the person in other words i
think that's just plain pointless
because we don't know and no one knows
how they really create ideas at all in
the first place
i've said more on this elsewhere so i
won't linger on it here and now any
further but criticism can of course be
undesirable if it's being offered where
and when it's not wanted but it's always
undesirable
when it's directed at a person for
example a field close to my heart is
astrophysics i worried out loud recently
that there has been a turn in the
culture of astrophysics
that they're not merely indifferent to
wealth and commercial success anymore
but the culture is actively antagonistic
towards it i compared this very modern
phenomena in that science in
astrophysics to the way in which wealthy
individuals and those who explored the
cosmos once upon a time had a very
symbiotic relationship but no more it
seems or not to the same extent
and this is not least because
astrophysicists in particular can rely
on governments for their funding almost
exclusively and so they feel free to
turn their nose up at business people
it's a shame but you can read more about
my thoughts on that turn for the worse
at brett hall dot org forward slash blog
forward slash astronomical disdain it's
a blog entry called astronomical disdain
it's a lengthy piece but what i describe
in it
are the very personal attacks on for
example the character of elon musk of
course he's a big rich boy he can take
it no doubt but it's coming from
professional astrophysicists
who should be natural allies of his now
i put that post out a little over a week
ago and it's very long but then this
week more
more of the same or in the same vein
well now a contingent of astrophysicists
i don't follow many on my own main
twitter account but i go searching just
to see
what the astrophysicists are up to and
so i get a good feel for what the
community online is like and this
particular contingent of astrophysicists
that i was checking in with
were complaining out loud on social
media once more about their work
and this by the way is not unusual
but this time they were complaining
about their very own students at
university so i guess it must be
examinations time or something and they
are there bemoaning quite publicly about
a perceived lack of effort or some such
i don't know if these professors of
astrophysics think their own students
might not be following them or their own
employers might not be reading their
tweets
or perhaps no one cares about any of
this which would be bizarre and even
more sad to some extent
but anyway one junior professor who
again will go unnamed
appeared in my feed and complaining
about how in the course they taught an
undergrad physics course i presume
anyway in this course he was teaching
that in theory his course runs for 15
weeks and in this course one or more of
his students
didn't turn up for the first x number of
weeks
and well perhaps most of the weeks the
students didn't turn up one or more of
these students and they only turned up
in the final two weeks or so and then
tried to cram it all in
and his comment was basically to say
not only can that not work it's not
permitted by him to work
and his colleagues and all of his peers
offered him words of support online
only one comment at all tried to push
back about how some young people find
undergraduate subjects like they find
high school subjects too slow and simple
and boring and they can get what needs
to be done in 15 weeks
done in those final two weeks many
people can get done in two weeks what it
takes others 15 weeks of work to do i
would add that given those students
experienced over the last two years
something remarkable with covert it
should be expected they have a lower
tolerance now for 15 weeks on or off
campus sitting through a series of
bi-weekly lectures plus tutorials where
the pace is far slower than how they
quickly learn to do
literally anything else in their lives
especially online
why not just assess the students
regardless of how often they turn up to
lectures or participate and see if they
meet the standards that ostensibly
you're setting and assessing with
examinations
what is it about attendance that
teachers and lecturers are still getting
hung up about i mean the assessments are
bad enough but attendance
why can't a student do the learning
elsewhere where they like in their own
time and if they do and you disagree
with it could we at least keep the
professor's complaints about them the
students offline
i might be getting hold i just cannot
imagine my own professors back in the
day when i was going through
undergraduate complaining out loud
online about all of this of course maybe
they did complain about it but that's
what staff rooms and cafe conversations
with their colleagues and immediate
superiors are for
aren't they or have things changed that
much has the culture descended into
discourtesy that much on top of all this
i would add the universities seem in
many ways to be in a very precarious
position
it's true that for the moment their
product which is credentialing as much
or more than it's educating
seems to have an unending stream of
customers it seems to
but as many observe maybe that's because
the customers they're accepting are
different to the customers that they
used to accept
or in other people's language standards
are being lowered
however
because those customers are changing
the others that are no longer choosing
to attend the university
you know many have now realized that
learning to code for example outside of
the university system confers almost all
of the advantages and more with none of
the drawbacks of the university
and writers bloggers youtubers creative
types technology types and even some
kinds of science types can see the
benefit of not extending what is really
their high school experience for just
another four years at university
the knowledge needed to succeed in the
modern knowledge economy might be better
found outside the university system
so if universities want to attract the
best
and not merely those that perhaps have
no other options
as the trend might seem to have started
to become
a little more marketing from the
academics at least on social media
might be in order
manners is marketing i would have
thought
don't turn off potential customers
i mean your students no i mean your
customers
with a public facing stream of
complaints on twitter and elsewhere
about your horrible work life
and your lazy students
high school students who potentially
would have joined your course are
reading this stuff
and they're turned off
look it might well be the case that
institutions called universities aren't
going anywhere at all i guess
but those working in them
are in the precarious place i just
mentioned because the demand for certain
things certain kinds of learning certain
subjects is changing
so your expertise
it which is in high demand today
might not be tomorrow
perhaps
and the university as it exists now as
more or less the sole centre of higher
learning
or
perhaps the most prestigious center of
higher learning in a community
is in a precarious situation
there is a sense some universities have
become rather like
libraries in their communities
they exist in a market which barely
exists and with no competition because
the state protects them from needing to
perform and the market is not
learning the market is credentialing
library still exists but
just go to a library sometime
i know what those in my area are like
they're more or less just places for
school and university students to study
like cafes but with more books and less
noise
very few people are taking books off the
shelves at the rates they once did they
don't need to
and everyone on their smartphone has
access to all the books and information
any library can offer the library offers
space and public toilets and perhaps the
government should provide that although
i am with penn gillette on this one and
i'll link to a youtube video
about what he has to say about libraries
and the extent to which we should be
extracting tax money from people to fund
libraries the same might be true
for universities
there is an inertia to this whole thing
university education like school
education
really is the horse and cart crotting
along the highway when there are tesla
zooming along the fast lane high speed
rail on the other side and jet airliners
flying overhead
and you're still told we're gonna need
to get onto the horse and cart to get
from a to b
there might always be a demand for
engineering and medical credentialing at
an institution with some sort of
government imprimatur or at least some
third party guarantee of quality
and universities have the advantage of
political power
leaders politicians are rather often
expert and report driven
we need to follow the advice from
experts unless they are accused of
ignoring the science or ignoring the
experts and so the experts from
universities will always provide studies
that say how beneficial universities are
to the economy
what else can politicians do
wait for a collision with reality
ultimately i suppose i personally hope
the universities don't enter a phase of
further decline i just want them to turn
around to focus
more on providing quality
in the pure sciences there is a strong
argument at the moment it may just be
the case that groupthink is slowing
progress and young people who come to
understand this phenomena in high school
and there are some have an advantage
because they could right now be
beginning to seek out alternatives to
university
why for example learn the physics that
everyone else will learn at university
for four years from 18 through to 21
years of age when those three or four
years could be spent learning something
truly new getting a head start on the
competition
doing what most phd students barely
begin to do
even in their thesis work as for artists
and creators well who wants to sit
through hours of material weekly on the
theory when that time could be devoted
to practice and production and quite
realistically earning in this day and
age
it would seem all the university can
offer over free or almost free online
alternatives
is the credential and even then you can
sometimes get credentialed online for
free the sought after certificate
testifying to the fact i have the
knowledge
but even then recruiters in many spaces
now know
is that degree anything like a guarantee
of possessing the knowledge google now
apparently barely considers formal
university credentials and instead for
many positions considers portfolios of
work evidence of what you have actually
done out there in the real world and
should it be required they have their
own in-house credentialing system of
practical coursework so there might be
good reasons we'll see for youngsters
out of high school to completely eschew
the formal tertiary education system and
go for something else
one reason is it's old but also if the
representatives of it on social media
are anything to go by well do you want
to entrust three or four years or even
more of your life to them
in some cases the answer has to be no
so we should expect a sea change or a
cultural shift when it comes to what
young people with an intellectual or
even creative bent aspire to do
do they want formal training via an old
institution
or do they desire something else
and what will be the reaction
well we know since ancient times that
what adults think of the youth has a
tradition of regarding their
rebelliousness as something hazardous
and unwelcome
but i'm going to say that all for next
time before i finish up i just wanted to
say i would rather everything i create
or
almost everything to remain entirely
free and available to everyone
and my reasons for this are well one the
people i admire the most have always
done exactly this produce their content
for free and two there's a long
tradition of this in knowledge creation
and specifically of course in science
that i do not think is obviously
improved on by any paid model
three much of my material i credit the
vast bulk to to david deutsch karl
popper and others so it feels wrong to
charge for exclusive access to what i
regard as in essence
largely descending from the ideas of
others
and for the work i do in spreading the
ideas of deutsche popper feynman so on
and so forth from physics and philosophy
is something i want to
go as far and wide as possible so i
don't want to limit anything by
causing it to be paid now i say all that
by way of preface because i do accept
donations for the same reason anyone
accepts payment ever one has bills to
pay and one may need to upgrade now and
again at times
so that some of those videos that i
produce can have the fancy visuals they
do
so i do have a means of donation for
those who would like to support me just
go to www.bretthall.org
and there on the front page are links to
patreon and paypal and i should let you
know for those who do contribute over
the last few months i've been happy to
engage with
many listeners via an asynchronous voice
messaging thing using whatsapp my
support is a smaller number which makes
that kind of interaction feasible for
now anyway
until next time bye-bye